He is Allah—there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him: Knower of the seen and unseen. He is the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful.
He is Allah—there is no god except Him: the King, the Most Holy, the All-Perfect, the Source of Serenity, the Watcher ˹of all˺, the Almighty, the Supreme in Might, the Majestic. Glorified is Allah far above what they associate with Him ˹in worship˺!
He is Allah: the Creator, the Inventor, the Shaper. He ˹alone˺ has the Most Beautiful Names. Whatever is in the heavens and the earth ˹constantly˺ glorifies Him. And He is the Almighty, All-Wise. (59:22-24)
- list of all sefirot (dominance-submission-foundation = Islam)


And never say of anything, “I will definitely do this tomorrow,” without adding, “if Allah so wills!” But if you forget, then remember your Lord, and say, “I trust my Lord will guide me to what is more right than this.” (18:23-24)


He sets forth for you an example ˹drawn˺ from your own lives: would you allow some of those ˹bondspeople˺ in your possession to be your equal partners in whatever ˹wealth˺ We have provided you, keeping them in mind as you are mindful of your peers? This is how We make the signs clear for people who understand.

 The passage says that since humans would not allow those who are inferior to them to become their partners in wealth, how can they set up helpless partners with Allah in His kingdom?
(30:28)


[Prophet], do not rush your tongue in an attempt to hasten [your grasp of the Revelation]: it is for Us to make sure of its safe collection and recitation. When We have recited it, repeat the recitation, and it is up to Us to make it clear. (75:16-19)


O you covered up ˹in your clothes˺! Arise and warn ˹all˺. Revere your Lord ˹alone˺. Purify your garments. ˹Continue to˺ shun idols. Do not do a favour expecting more ˹in return˺. And persevere for ˹the sake of˺ your Lord. (74:1-7)


Indeed, We sent it down on a blessed night, for We always warn ˹against evil˺. On that night every matter of wisdom is ordained by a command from Us, for We have always sent ˹messengers˺ as a mercy from your Lord. He ˹alone˺ is truly the All-Hearing, All-Knowing—the Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything in between, if only you had sure faith. (44:3-7)


"We did not create the heavens and the earth and everything between them for mere play. Suppose We had wanted a pastime: in that case We would be sufficient for Ourself. No! We hurl the truth against falsehood, and truth obliterates it—see how falsehood vanishes away!" (21:16-18)


For Allah created the heavens and the earth for a purpose, so that every soul may be paid back for what it has committed. And none will be wronged. (45:22)


˹He is the One˺ Who created death and life in order to test which of you is best in deeds. And He is the Almighty, All-Forgiving. (67:2)


...and—above all—to be one of those who have faith and urge each other to perseverance and urge each other to compassion. (99:17) [faith is above the works but without them is zealotry]


...who donate ˹some of˺ their wealth only to purify themselves, not in return for someone’s favours, but seeking the pleasure of their Lord, the Most High. (92:18-20)


And with this ˹rain˺ We revive a lifeless land. Similar is the emergence ˹from the graves˺. (50:11)


Glory be to the One Who created all ˹things in˺ pairs—˹be it˺ what the earth produces, their genders, or what they do not know! (36:36)


As the two recording-angels—˹one˺ sitting to the right, and ˹the other to˺ the left—note ˹everything˺, not a word does a person utter without having a ˹vigilant˺ observer ready ˹to write it down˺. (50:17-18)


Say, “I do not know if what you are promised is near or my Lord has set a distant time for it. ˹He is the˺ Knower of the unseen, disclosing none of it to anyone, except messengers of His choice. Then He appoints angel-guards before and behind them [in time] to ensure that the messengers fully deliver the messages of their Lord—though He ˹already˺ knows all about them, and keeps account of everything. (72:25-28)


There is also a sign for them in the night: We strip from it daylight, then—behold!—they are in darkness. (36:37)


...Allah, Lord of pathways of ˹heavenly˺ ascent, ˹through which˺ the angels and the ˹holy˺ spirit will ascend to Him on a Day fifty thousand years in length. (70:3-4)

Judgment Day will seem like 50 000 years for a disbeliever, but it will seem like a very short period for a believer. The Prophet (ﷺ) is reported in a ḥadîth collected by Imâm Aḥmed to have said that, for the believer, this long period will be like the time they took to perform a single prayer in the world.


And indeed, We created above you seven levels ˹of heaven˺. We are never unmindful of ˹Our˺ creation. (23:17)


Allah is the One Who created seven heavens ˹in layers˺, and likewise for the earth. The ˹divine˺ command descends between them so you may know that Allah is Most Capable of everything and that Allah certainly encompasses all things in ˹His˺ knowledge. (65:12)


We certainly destroyed the societies around you after having varied the signs so perhaps they would return ˹to the Right Path˺. (46:27)


So leave to Me ˹O Prophet˺ those who reject this message. We will gradually draw them to destruction in ways they cannot comprehend.
I ˹only˺ delay their end for a while, but My planning is flawless. (68:44-45)


So endure patiently, as did the Messengers of Firm Resolve. And do not ˹seek to˺ hasten ˹the torment˺ for the deniers. On the Day they see what they have been threatened with, it will be as if they had only stayed ˹in this world˺ for an hour of a day. ˹This is˺ a ˹sufficient˺ warning! Then, will anyone be destroyed except the rebellious people? (46:35)

Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Muḥammad are called the Messengers of Firm Resolve.


And He is the One Who originates the creation then will resurrect it—which is even easier for Him. To Him belong the finest attributes in the heavens and the earth. And He is the Almighty, All-Wise. (30:27)


If Allah were to punish people ˹immediately˺ for what they have committed, He would not have left a single living being on earth. But He delays them for an appointed term. And when their time arrives, then surely Allah is All-Seeing of His servants. (35:45)


Now, whenever a human being is tested by their Lord through ˹His˺ generosity and blessings, they boast, “My Lord has ˹deservedly˺ honoured me!” But when He tests them by limiting their provision, they protest, “My Lord has ˹undeservedly˺ humiliated me!” (89:15-16)


Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth. His light is like a niche in which there is a lamp, the lamp is in a crystal, the crystal is like a shining star, lit from ˹the oil of˺ a blessed olive tree, ˹located˺ neither to the east nor the west, whose oil would almost glow, even without being touched by fire. Light upon light! Allah guides whoever He wills to His light. And Allah sets forth parables for humanity. For Allah has ˹perfect˺ knowledge of all things. (24:35)


...Their light will shine ahead of them and on their right. They will say, “Our Lord! Perfect our light for us, and forgive us. ˹For˺ You are truly Most Capable of everything.” (66:8)


So be steadfast in faith in all uprightness ˹O Prophet˺—the natural Way of Allah which He has instilled in ˹all˺ people. Let there be no change in this creation of Allah. That is the Straight Way, but most people do not know. (30:30)


Recite what has been revealed to you of the Book and establish prayer. Indeed, ˹genuine˺ prayer should deter ˹one˺ from indecency and wickedness. The remembrance of Allah is ˹an˺ even greater ˹deterrent˺. And Allah ˹fully˺ knows what you ˹all˺ do. (29:45)


and Who ordained precisely and inspired accordingly (87:3)


So, surely with hardship comes ease. Surely with ˹that˺ hardship comes ˹more˺ ease. (94:5-6)

If a definite noun is repeated in Arabic, it means that we are referring to the same thing. For example, “I met the man and I gave the man some money.” But if an indefinite noun is repeated, it means we are referring to two different things. For example, “I met a man and I gave a man some money.” With this in mind, we realize that 94:5-6 refers to one hardship (a definite noun) and two different eases (an indefinite noun). Hence, the Arabic saying: “Two eases cannot be overcome by one hardship.”


˹Some of˺ the nomadic Arabs say, “We believe.” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “You have not believed. But say, ‘We have submitted,’ for faith has not yet entered your hearts. But if you obey Allah and His Messenger ˹wholeheartedly˺, He will not discount anything from ˹the reward of˺ your deeds. Allah is truly All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.” (49:14)

 The verse makes a distinction between Islam (the declaration of accepting the faith, then performing Islamic duties such as prayers and fasting) and Îmân (a higher state of Islam, which means to embrace the faith wholeheartedly). This distinction is very clear in a famous narration from the Prophet (ﷺ), commonly known as the Ḥadîth of Gabriel.


You surely cannot guide whoever you like ˹O Prophet˺, but it is Allah Who guides whoever He wills, and He knows best who are ˹fit to be˺ guided. (28:56)


˹Remember, O  Prophet,˺ when Moses said to his people, “O my people! Why do you hurt me when you already know I am Allah’s messenger to you?” So when they ˹persistently˺ deviated, Allah caused their hearts to deviate. For Allah does not guide the rebellious people. (61:5)


And on the Day the Hour will arrive, the wicked will swear that they did not stay ˹in this world˺ more than an hour. In this way they were always deluded ˹in the world˺. (30:55)
But those gifted with knowledge and faith will say ˹to them˺, “You did actually stay—as destined by Allah—until the Day of Resurrection. So here is the Day of Resurrection ˹which you denied˺! But you did not know ˹it was true˺.” (30:56)


Allah has promised those of you who believe and do good that He will certainly make them successors in the land, as He did with those before them; and will surely establish for them their faith which He has chosen for them; and will indeed change their fear into security—˹provided that˺ they worship Me, associating nothing with Me. But whoever disbelieves after this ˹promise˺, it is they who will be the rebellious. (24:55)


Wondrous is the affair of the believer for there is good for him in every matter and this is not the case with anyone except the believer.

"Indeed, Allah commands you to return trusts to their rightful owners; and when you judge between people, judge with fairness. What a noble commandment from Allah to you! Surely Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing." (4:58)

This verse was revealed right after Mecca had peacefully surrendered to the Muslims. ’Ali ibn Abi Ṭâlib, the Prophet’s cousin and son-in-law, took the Ka’bah’s key by force from Othmân ibn Ṭalḥa, the non-Muslim keeper of the Ka’bah. The verse was revealed to the Prophet (ﷺ) inside the Ka’bah with the order to give the key back to its rightful owner. He (ﷺ) ordered Ali to return the key to the keeper immediately along with an apology. Othmân was also promised that his family would keep the key forever. The keeper was so touched by the Quranic sense of justice that he decided to accept Islam.


"When the angels seize the souls of those who have wronged themselves—scolding them, “What was wrong with you?” they will reply, “We were oppressed in the land.” The angels will respond, “Was Allah’s earth not spacious enough for you to emigrate?” It is they who will have Hell as their home—what an evil destination!" (4:97)

This verse refers to some of those who had accepted Islam secretly in Mecca but refused to emigrate to Medina along with the rest of the believers. Some of them were killed in the Battle of Badr when they were rallied by the Meccans to fight against the Muslims. The verse also applies to any Muslim who accepts abuse and refuses to move to another place where they can live with dignity and practice their faith freely.

Except helpless men, women, and children who cannot afford a way out—it is right to hope that Allah will pardon them. For Allah is Ever-Pardoning, All-Forgiving.

Whoever emigrates in the cause of Allah will find many safe havens and bountiful resources throughout the earth. Those who leave their homes and die while emigrating to Allah and His Messenger—their reward has already been secured with Allah. And Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.


Do they not see that We gradually reduce their land from its borders? Allah decides—none can reverse His decision. And He is swift in reckoning.


And Allah has favoured some of you over others in provision. But those who have been much favoured would not share their wealth with those ˹bondspeople˺ in their possession, making them their equals. Do they then deny Allah’s favours?

 In other words, if the pagan slave-masters are not willing to be equal to their slaves, why would they make anyone equal to Allah—the Supreme Master and Creator of all things?


Permission ˹to fight back˺ is ˹hereby˺ granted to those being fought, for they have been wronged. And Allah is truly Most Capable of helping them ˹prevail˺. (22:39)


And before this ˹Quran˺ the Book of Moses was ˹revealed as˺ a guide and mercy. And this Book is a confirmation, in the Arabic tongue, to warn those who do wrong, and as good news to those who do good. (46:12)


Do not argue with the People of the Book unless gracefully, except with those of them who act wrongfully. And say, “We believe in what has been revealed to us and what was revealed to you. Our God and your God is ˹only˺ One. And to Him we ˹fully˺ submit.” (29:46)


Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “O Jews! If you claim to be Allah’s chosen ˹people˺ out of all humanity, then wish for death, if what you say is true.” (62:6)


Indeed, there is more fear in their hearts for you ˹believers˺ than for Allah. That is because they are a people who do not comprehend. (59:13)


Allah does not forbid you from dealing kindly and fairly with those who have neither fought nor driven you out of your homes. Surely Allah loves those who are fair.
Allah only forbids you from befriending those who have fought you for ˹your˺ faith, driven you out of your homes, or supported ˹others˺ in doing so. And whoever takes them as friends, then it is they who are the ˹true˺ wrongdoers. (60:8-9)


Indeed, sincere devotion is due ˹only˺ to Allah. As for those who take other lords besides Him, ˹saying,˺ “We worship them only so they may bring us closer to Allah,” surely Allah will judge between all regarding what they differed about. Allah certainly does not guide whoever persists in lying and disbelief. (39:3)


Indeed, most of those who call out to you ˹O Prophet˺ from outside ˹your˺ private quarters have no understanding ˹of manners˺. Had they been patient until you could come out to them, it would have certainly been better for them. And Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful. (49:4-5)


And indeed, We adorned the lowest heaven with ˹stars like˺ lamps, and made them ˹as missiles˺ for stoning ˹eavesdropping˺ devils, for whom We have also prepared the torment of the Blaze. (67:5)

Some jinn [also] used to eavesdrop on the heaven, then pass on what they heard to fortune-tellers. But this practice came to an end once Muḥammad (ﷺ) was sent as a messenger with the Quran.


Surely Satan is an enemy to you, so take him as an enemy. He only invites his followers to become inmates of the Blaze. (35:6)
- therefore can not be an potentially ambivalent jinn (the word jinn also has a more general meaning in Arabic)


Allah asked, “O Iblîs! What prevented you from prostrating to what I created with My Own Hands? Did you ˹just˺ become proud? Or have you always been arrogant?”
He replied, “I am better than he is: You created me from fire and him from clay.”
Allah commanded, “Then get out of Paradise, for you are truly cursed.
And surely upon you is My condemnation until the Day of Judgment.”
Satan appealed, “My Lord! Then delay my end until the Day of their resurrection.”
Allah said, “You will be delayed
until the appointed Day.”
Satan said, “By Your Glory! I will certainly mislead them all,
except Your chosen servants among them.”
Allah concluded, “The truth is—and I ˹only˺ say the truth—:
I will surely fill up Hell with you and whoever follows you from among them, all together.” (38:75-85)